id: dark-techno
rank: 34
name: DARK TECHNO & FRENCH ELECTRO
family: Electronic
years: 2008 → present
sub: Cold, minimal, menacing electronic pop from the Bromance/Ed Banger lineage
spec: 94,90,70,46,40,46,54,62,66,64,60,62,68,74,72,64,56,48,42,36
synthType: sawtooth
freqs: 55, 68.94, 86.41

what:
 The French electro wave — Justice, Ed Banger Records, and then Brodinski and Gesaffelstein's *Bromance* label from 2011 — took the distorted maximalism of the mid-2000s and stripped it into something colder and slower. *Gesaffelstein* (Mike Lévy) built an aesthetic of monochrome severity: black suits, no smiling, industrial techno at pop tempos.

artists:
 Justice, SebastiAn, Brodinski, Gesaffelstein, Boys Noize; the darker techno adjacency of Perturbator and Carpenter Brut. *The Weeknd* is the pop half of this specific collaboration — *Hyperion* (2019) is the album, and Lévy also produced parts of it with Pharrell and Haim.

trivia:
 Before this, Gesaffelstein co-produced two of the harshest tracks on Kanye West's *Yeezus* (2013) — "Black Skinhead" and "Send It Up" — which is where his industrial-minimal approach entered American pop. The name is a portmanteau of Gesamtkunstwerk (Wagner's "total work of art") and Einstein, which tells you exactly how seriously the project takes itself.

sonic:
 Slow for techno (around 100–110 BPM), with a distorted kick that occupies enormous space, almost no midrange, and a single detuned analogue synth motif repeating without variation. Reverb is short and metallic. The Weeknd's falsetto is placed dry and close against that emptiness, which is the entire dramatic effect.

gear:
 Analogue monosynths — Moog, Korg MS-20 — run through guitar distortion and analogue delay; Roland TR-909 kicks driven into saturation; hardware compressors used as an effect rather than for control. Lévy works largely with hardware and prints his synth parts rather than keeping them recallable.

prod:
 The productions are deliberately under-arranged: four or five elements total, no build-ups, and no filter sweeps. Loudness is achieved through distortion and clipping on individual sources rather than a limiter on the master, which preserves transient snap while still reading as aggressive. The vocal is left almost unprocessed against it — a pop record wearing a techno record's clothes.

tracks:
 - LEGACY | KAS:ST
 - Ernstige - Original Mix | Pedram
 - Risky Business | ZHU
 - Lost in the Fire | Gesaffelstein, The Weeknd
