id: gorillaz-alt
rank: 15
name: GENRE-FLUID ALTERNATIVE HIP HOP
family: Hip Hop
years: 1998 → present
source: ON REPEAT
sub: Rap as one ingredient in a producer-led collage rather than the frame around it
spec: 80,86,78,60,54,60,66,72,76,74,70,72,76,78,74,68,62,54,46,40
synthType: square
freqs: 55, 68.94, 86.41

what:
 *Gorillaz* — Damon Albarn (Blur) and comics artist Jamie Hewlett — launched in 1998 as a fictional four-piece band, which freed the project from genre expectation entirely. Each album is a curated guest list spanning rap, soul, dub, Afrobeat and electronic music, held together by Albarn's melancholy melodic writing.

artists:
 Gorillaz themselves; the wider lineage includes DJ Shadow, Massive Attack's guest-vocalist model, Danger Mouse (who produced *Demon Days*), and Anderson .Paak's later collaborations. "Stylo" features *Bobby Womack* and *Mos Def*.

trivia:
 Bobby Womack was *66, in poor health and had not made a significant record in years* when Albarn brought him in for Plastic Beach; he sang until he physically could not continue, and the take on "Stylo" is that performance. The collaboration restarted his career — Albarn went on to produce Womack's 2012 comeback album. The song's video is a car chase starring *Bruce Willis*, playing himself, shooting at the band.

sonic:
 A single hypnotic synth-bass motorik pulse under a slow, four-on-the-floor kick, with everything else — Albarn's low-register verse, Mos Def's rap, Womack's soul screaming — layered on top of an unchanging bed. The mix is deliberately murky, drenched in tape saturation, with the guest vocal always the brightest thing in the field.

gear:
 Albarn's toolkit is famously cheap and portable: melodica, a Korg MicroKORG, an old Casio, an iPad (Plastic Beach's successor was partly recorded on one), plus a real Rhodes and dub-style spring reverbs and tape echoes. Hewlett's visual identity does as much work as the instruments in defining the project.

prod:
 Albarn builds the bed first, then invites guests in and lets them do what they do — the record is assembled from sessions recorded in different cities and stitched. That accounts for the collage quality and also for the consistency: the glue is Albarn's mixing choices, heavy on tape emulation and a narrow low-mid focus that makes wildly different sources sound like the same room.

tracks:
 - P2·07 | Stylo | Gorillaz, Bobby Womack, Mos Def
